Dear Advisees,
*****Please read this missive in its entirety! Failure to adhere to the below may result in a delay in my being able to clear you to register*****
 
The 2023 Fall Semester schedule of classes will be made available on Monday, March 27th and advanced registration begins Tuesday, April 4th. Also, the 2023 Summer Semester schedule of classes is available now and advanced registration begins Tuesday, March 1st.
 
While you do not need clearance from your advisor to register for summer (or winter) term courses, clearance will be required to allow you to register for fall. Here are some important FAQ answers regarding my expectations as we start the process towards registration advising.
 
Q: Do I need to make an appointment with you to be cleared to register for classes?
A: Not necessarily. We can handle this process asynchronously via E-mail. It is the simplest and most efficient way to get clearance as long as you are fairly confident regarding at least some of the courses that you might wish to take. Just send me a list of courses that you are considering. I can then look at what you proposed and offer my opinion and/or clear you to register if your choices are sound.
 
Q: If I wish to make an appointment, how do I do it?
Go to https://www.google.com/url?q=https://informationsystems.umbc.edu/home/undergraduate-programs/undergraduate-advising/&source=gmail-imap&ust=1677680971000000&usg=AOvVaw0Eg7eiEbSLSuT5MVpQA98U and choose the “Appointment Calendar” link under my name.
 
Q: Are appointments on-line or in person?
A: As of now, all appointments are on-line.
 
Q: Do I need to have a schedule ready for your review before we meet?
A: You need to have something, a rough idea of what courses you might want to take. If you do not come prepared with at least a rough draft of your schedule, I may not be able to clear you to register at that time. You may need to make a follow up appointment or at least send a follow-up E-mail with a list of classes for me to consider.

Q: How many classes should I attempt to register for?
A: If you want to be considered a full-time student, you must register for a minimum of 12 credits.  Also, since the state of Maryland requires a minimum of 120 earned credits to graduate with an undergraduate degree, if you want to finish your college career within a 4-year timeframe, you must average 30 credits per year (which works out to 15 credits every fall and spring on average if you do not want to consider winter or summer courses).

Q: What classes should I consider adding to my tentative schedule?
A: In general, I recommend that you review your degree audit and make sure you choose courses that fulfill any requirement you have yet to meet, focusing on requirements for the major first. Also, review the “Four Year Academic Pathways” document (found at https://www.google.com/url?q=https://apps.my.umbc.edu/pathways/&source=gmail-imap&ust=1677680971000000&usg=AOvVaw25JZUh-FNbici5tJqmNEDa) for your major for our recommended course sequences.

Q: How can I tell if the course I want to take meets a graduation requirement?
A: To find the answer to this question, go to your Degree Audit and see whether these (or any course) is taking up a spot in any of the required categories. You may ignore the four categories at the very top (“120 Academic Credits”, “2.00 GPA”, “45 Upper-Level credits”, and “30 Credits in Residence”) as these are University level or State of Maryland level requirements.  But starting with the category, “Writing Intensive Requirement” through to your last category for your major, if a course you are enrolled in is taking up a slot, it is fulfilling that requirement.
Finally, remember also that the schedule won't be out until the 27th. For any clearance I provide prior to the schedule release, you may need to consider substitutes if one or more of your selected courses are not offered this semester or if you have chosen courses with time conflicts. While as an advisor I can clear you to register prior to this date, any individual course permissions cannot be granted until the actual schedule of classes becomes available.

Q: Can you tell me what are the pre-requisites for [course x]?
A:  For any course you wish to take, when you do a “Search for Classes”, look at the course details, and under “Description” it will, among other things, list any prerequisites that course would require.
 
Q: Can I take a course outside of UMBC for credit?
A: To take a course at another institution for credit at UMBC, the objectives of the course that you take at the other institution must map well enough to a course at UMBC. The Registrar’s office approves all transfer credits of this nature and is the final arbiter. The usual process is for a form to be submitted and signed through DocuSign (not a separate pdf) - it automatically generates a document that is sent to all parties for a signature. The form that you must fill out whenever you wish to do this is called the “Verification of Transferability” form which you can find under the “Transfer Request Forms” sub-menu of the “Forms” tab on the Registrar’s website. The form must be submitted at least 3 weeks before the course begins. Use the following web address: https://artsys.usmd.edu/ to check any course equivalency from Maryland community colleges to University System of Maryland institutions and other participating institutions prior to filling out the form if you wish.

Q: How do I know if a course I want to take will meet a graduation requirement?
A: To find the answer to this question, go to your Degree Audit. You may ignore the four categories at the very top (“120 Academic Credits”, “2.00 GPA”, “45 Upper-Level credits”, and “30 Credits in Residence”) as these are University level or State of Maryland level requirements. But starting with the category, “Writing Intensive Requirement” through to your last category for your major, if a course you are enrolled in is taking up a slot, it is fulfilling that requirement. If, however, the words “Not Satisfied” appear at the top of a category, then you still have some requirements from that category yet to be fulfilled.

Q: What if a course I want to take meets more than one GEP requirement?
A: It will only count as one. The Degree Audit will pick the first GEP category that still has an empty slot and place the class there. For example, if the class satisfies GEP A/H or Culture, and a student still has a need for an A/H class, it'll be placed there. If a student takes another A/H class, then the A/H/Culture class will automatically shift into the Culture spot. Or a student can indicate their preference by placing an RT ticket to put a class in a specific category. Also, if you are, for example, missing a Culture, you can check your A/H classes and if any of them are listed as A/H or Culture, then you can take another A/H (and the course will shift to Culture) or take a Culture (and the course will stay in A/H).
 
Q: How does an internship work?
A: Here’s how our internships work:
Go to https://informationsystems.umbc.edu/home/undergraduate-programs/undergraduate-course-listing/ and find the internship you want to take
Click on the link for that internship and follow the procedures indicated

Q: I want to take [three courses] this summer. Can you clear me to register?
A: Since you do not need clearance to register for any summer or winter classes, you are technically free to register for any summer/winter course without my permission.  However, I am going on record, in writing, as stating in the strongest possible terms that I recommend strongly against your proposal to take three courses in the summer term. The summer is a condensed format, meaning that your weekly coursework is at least doubled, and in some formats more than that.  If you take three courses concurrently in a single summer session, that is at least the equivalent weekly workload of six courses taken in the fall or spring.  If you are to take more than one, we recommend that at least you take just one course per session.
 
Q: Should I take COMP101Y or FYS?
A: COMP101 is NOT required for either BTA or IS majors. We recommend this course to students who don't have any coding/technology background, not sure what technology major they want to pursue, and especially those who may have not placed into Calculus (MATH155) and have to start with MATH106.
COMP101Y/101 should ideally be taken by students in their first semester at UMBC. If they didn’t get into it in their first semester, still don’t have Calculus placement and are not ready to take IS147, they can take COMP101Y or COMP101 in their 2nd semester. BTA students can take IS125 in their 2nd semester without taking COMP101.
The difference between COMP101 and COMP101Y is that COMP101Y has an additional discussion section that covers a variety of topics relevant to new students and introduces them to UMBC resources. Students only should be taking one Y section, so if they already took or are taking another Y or FYE course, they should take regular COMP101.

